In this video we'll learn about constructors and destructors constructors are special member methods
that are invoked during object creation.
They're commonly used for initialization constructors are easy to recognize since they have the same
name as the class.
Constructors do not specify a return type and like other methods they can be overloaded.
Let's see how we can declare constructors for the player class in the slide we have the player class
that we've defined previously but we want to concentrate specifically on a constructors.
In this example we have three overloaded constructors in the public section of the class declaration.
Notice that the constructors have the same name as the class and they don't specify a return type.
The first constructor is in no args constructor and expects no arguments.
The second constructor expects a single standard string object as an argument and the third constructor
expects three arguments.
A standard string and two integers that represent health and Expwy overloading constructors is very
common in C plus plus classes.
It really gives you a lot of flexibility when initializing objects.
Now let's see some constructors for the account class.
In this slide we can see the declaration for the account class.
Notice that we have 4 overloaded constructors in the public section of the class.
The first constructor is the no args constructor.
The second constructor expects two arguments a string representing the account name and a double representing
the account balance.
The third constructor Expo's just distrain and the last constructor just to double will get into much
more detail about constructors in the next several videos.
But let's see what a destructor is.
Destructors are also special member methods that have the same name as the class.
However destructors have a Tildy preceding their name destructors are invoked automatically by C++ when
an object is destroyed and its a great place to release memory closed files and free up any other resources.
It makes no sense to allow overloaded destructors since the destructor is called automatically by C++.
If there were multiple destructors and C++ would have to determine which one to call.
So that's not an option.
So you can only specify one destructor per class and that destructor has no return type and no parameters.
Let's see how a destructor would be declared for the player class.
Here is the declaration for the player class as we've seen before.
Notice that the last declaration is the declaration for the class destructor.
It has the same name as the class and it's preceded by a Tildy.
It has no return type and no parameters.
This destructor will be called automatically when a local object goes out of scope.
Or when we delete a pointer to an object as you would expect the destructor for the account class is
declared exactly the same way except that the name is a count.
So how and when are constructors and destructors called.
Here's a very simple example in the code block we're creating for player objects.
The first player object is called Slayer.
Since no initialization information is provided the no args constructor is called the second player
object is called Frank.
And we're providing a string and two integers during initialization.
This means that the constructor that expects a string into integers will be called the third and fourth
objects will be initialized using the overloaded constructor that expects a single string object.
Note that all of these objects are local objects and they'll be created on the stack.
We can use them as we would any object.
But then when the block ends these objects go out of scope and their destructors will be called automatically.
So in this case all four destructors will be called and whatever code we provide in the destructors
will be executed before the objects are destroyed.
In the case of enemy we have a pointer to a player object and we use the constructor that expects a
string and two integers to initialize it.
We'll use it then when we're done we delete it.
This will cause the enemy object's destructor.
If you provide no constructors and no destructor C++ will automatically provide a default constructor
and a default destructor that are empty.
Ok so I'm backing the idea.
I'm in the section 13 workspace in the constructors and destructors project what I've done here is I've
taken the player class and I've written some constructors for it just like we did in the slides except
I have implemented them and they really don't do any initialization.
Learn how to do that properly in the next few videos.
They simply do an output statement that say which constructor is being called.
So let me show you what I've got going on here.
We've got the player class just like we had before and we've got these private attributes here.
Name health and XP again just like we had before.
I've created a method right here called Set name that simply sets the name of the player to whatever
is being passed in here named Val.
The reason we're doing that is so that we can see which objects are being destroyed by name.
It would be really easy to follow.
Then we've got our three overloaded constructors here you can see that they've got the same name as
the class that's their constructors.
They're overloaded so we've got three of them with three different signatures.
This first one will be called when there is no information provided for initialization and all it's
going to do is just say no args constructor call.
That's it.
It's not going to do any initialization or anything.
As I said we'll learn how to do that in the next few videos.
This constructor expects a single string and it will just say string our constructor called.
And then the last constructor expects a string to health and an XP and it will simply display three
args constructor called ok.
Then when the object is destroyed this destructor down here gets called.
Notice it's the same name as the class with that Tildy right in front.
That's very important.
No return type and nothing in here.
And that's simply going to say destructor called for name.
So to say destructor called for hero for Frank for Slayer.
Whatever the name of the object is that what we can see the order in which this stuff is happening.
OK so that's it pretty straightforward and what I want to do now is I've got my main and I've got some
breakpoints in here.
I've established these blocks now.
The idea behind these little blocks here is normally you wouldn't write code like this but it's important
because this Slayer object right here is within the scope of this block so when it goes out of scope
the destructor will be called automatically some forcing that issue here so that you can see how this
works.
So what I'm doing is that I'm doing the Slayer.
I'm creating some other players and let's just debug this one walk through it so you can see exactly
what's happening.
So I'll start the debugger.
And I'll put the output window over here in the right so that we can see our output OK.
Perfect.
So now we're on line 37 that's where we're starting and what we're doing is we're creating Slayer Slayer
is a player object.
It's local to this Bloch's going to be created on the stack.
So I'm going to select next notice that I'm creating it with no information.
So what's going to happen here is that no args constructor will be called.
And that's what we expect to display up here.
So let me scroll up a little bit here and let's do that let's go next.
You can see the no args constructor just got called.
That object has not been created.
I want to set the name for that object to Slayer saw execute that line now that object goes out of scope
we're done with this block.
So the object needs to be destroyed since it's no longer needed the way that happens is that destructor
will be called right before the object is destroyed.
So I expect this destructor right here to be called and say destructor called for Slayer.
So let's see that exactly what happened destructor call for Slayer.
Now we've got another block here.
And what we're doing here is we're creating three player objects Frank hero and villain.
In the case of Frank it's no args constructor.
Right I'm not providing any information in the place of hero it's a single string and in the case of
villains I've got the string and the two integers.
So I expect this to say that the no args constructor has been called then the single string constructor
has been called and then the 3R constructor has been called.
Ok but what's interesting about this is not so much that that's pretty intuitive.
It's the way that the destructors are called.
So let's walk through this little block here.
So the first thing we expect is Frank to be created with no args and there it is no args constructor.
I'm going to set the name to Frank here it will be called with a single string constructor.
So you can see that that correct constructors being called here I've set the name to here and now villaine
with the three args constructor.
Now once I execute the set name method sets the name for a villain.
We're out of the block right so these objects are not out of scope they need to be destroyed.
What's interesting is Notice the order that we created them and we created them as Frank hero and the
villain.
And you'll see the order of destruction is the reverse order.
So let's walk through this.
We just called the destructor for a villain.
Now we're going to call the destructor for hero.
And finally for Frank so you could see that when objects go out of scope the destructors are called
in the order in reverse order which they were created.
Finally down here we've got some pointers to player objects in this case.
Enemy is a new player.
Again I'm providing no initialization here.
So it's going to call the no args constructor so let's do that real quick.
No args constructor call just like we expect.
I'm going to set that name to enemy.
Now here I've got a level boss object which is really I've got a level boss pointer rather to an object
and I'm creating it using the three arg constructor right here the string and the two integers.
So that's the constructor that I expect to be called.
And that's exactly what happened is three args constructor called.
I'm going to set that name to level boss.
Now I want to delete those objects that were created dynamically on the heap.
In this case I can explicitly delete them and the destructors will be called.
So in this case we expect the enemy destructor to be called and then the level boss destructor would
be called to that's it.
In the next video what we'll do is we'll learn about default constructors and we'll learn how to really
initialize things correctly and efficiently.